feat: add new blog Pulumi in a Cloud Native World (#12296)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/gain-platform-superpowers-with-the-kebap-stack/index.md

adopt and benefit from emerging Cloud Native technologies.

## One Reference Architecture: The `KEBAP` Stack

The `KEBAP` stack consists of the following components:

- **K**ubernetes (with Kyverno as a bonus)
- **E**xternal Secrets Operator
- **B**ackstage
- **A**rgo CD
- **P**ulumi

This combination forms a standardized GitOps stack applicable to various infrastructure projects. By implementing the
`KEBAP` stack, we've consistently reduced the time required for teams to establish development and production
environments from months to minutes.

To following along, we are going to use
the [capabilities of platforms](https://tag-app-delivery.cncf.io/whitepapers/platforms/#capabilities-of-platforms)
definition from the CNCF working group on Platforms.

<img src="base.png" width="500px">

## Let's Break It Down

Let's take a closer look at each component of the `KEBAP` stack and understand how they work together to streamline the
software delivery process.

The five layers of the `KEBAP` stack are designed to address different aspects of the software delivery process:

### Kubernetes

<img src="k.png" width="500px">

> Kubernetes serves as the orchestration layer. It's now the dominant container orchestration platform across the

Reviewer: I think we are probably overloading definitions. Orchestration and infrastructure. Because Pulumi also does some orchestration on infrastructure as well. So we need to define the layers involved here. 

What layer of infra is K8s involved in and what layer of infra is Pulumi involved in? I think we need to clarify that so it makes more sense

We also installed the [Pulumi plugin](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-backstage-plugin) for Backstage, which allows us
to manage our infrastructure as code directly from the Backstage UI. There are several ways to interact with the plugin.
If you want to use the scaffolding feature, you can add following `step` for example to your `Template` definition:

```yaml
apiVersion: scaffolder.backstage.io/v1beta3
kind: Template
metadata:
  name: kubernetes-template
  title: Kubernetes Cluster
  description: |
    A template for creating a new Kubernetes Cluster.
  tags:
  - pulumi
  - kubernetes
spec:
  steps:
  - id: pulumi-new-component
    name: Cookie cut the component Pulumi project
    action: pulumi:new
    input:
      name: "${{ parameters.component_id }}-infrastructure"
      description: ${{ parameters.description | dump }}
      organization: ediri
      stack: ${{ parameters.stack }}
      template: "https://github.com/my-silly-organisation/microservice-civo/tree/main/infrastructure-${{ parameters.cloud }}-${{ parameters.language }}"
      config:
        "node:node_count": "${{ parameters.nodeCount }}"
      folder: .
```

### Argo CD

<img src="a.png" width="500px">

> Argo CD handles the deployment layer, ensuring that the current deployment matches what is declaratively defined in the

Reviewer: I can't tell if the Argo layer is handling deployments or is the Pulumi K8s Operator handling the deployments within the K8s clusters.

Reviewer: I am also having trouble understanding Backstage's relationship with Argo. 

I think you should probably explain it not in the KEBAP order but more in the workflow order. 

K8s is the container orch layer
Pulumi then manages the cloud infra that the K8s clusters runs in
All deployments to infra within the K8s cluster is done by the Pulumi K8s operators
Argo does X
Backstage interfaces with Pulumi to provide a GUI to templates which are executed by the K8s operator
ESO gives secrets...

---

> title: "Pulumi in a Cloud Native World"

Author: done

4. Observability: Built-in monitoring and logging provide insights into application and infrastructure performance.
5. Integration: IDPs seamlessly integrate with existing tools and workflows in the development lifecycle.

By implementing an IDP, organizations can significantly reduce cognitive load on developers, accelerate time-to-market,
improve security and compliance, and foster a culture of innovation. IDPs act as a force multiplier, allowing
development teams to focus on creating business value while the platform handles the underlying complexity of
cloud-native infrastructure.

`KEBAP`, as a reference architecture, demonstrates how to construct an IDP using best-in-class CNCF technologies,
orchestrated and managed through Pulumi's infrastructure as code capabilities.

Platform engineering addresses these challenges by creating a layer of abstraction between development teams and the
underlying infrastructure. This approach aims to simplify workflows, standardize practices, and empower developers to
focus on creating business value rather than grappling with intricate infrastructure details.

> The [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) (CNCF) landscape offers a rich ecosystem of tools and

Reviewer: I think we got the causation flipped here. A lot of people are using a fully CNCF stack or at least using K8s. They want to make this more self-service for their developers through a platform. There are pieces that can go into it from the CNCF stack, but how do you orchestrate it all together and fit it together is the question that is overwhelming

technologies that can be
leveraged to build these platforms. However, the sheer number of options can be overwhelming, making it difficult for
organizations to determine the best combination of tools for their specific needs.

At Pulumi's Customer Experience Team, we've observed that adopting infrastructure as code often serves as a catalyst for
organizations to reassess their entire software delivery process. This reassessment frequently leads to the
implementation of more streamlined, automated, and secure methodologies – the core principles of platform engineering.

To address these challenges and provide guidance, we've created a reference archticture called the `KEBAP` stack.
Demonstrating how various CNCF technologies can
be integrated cohesively using Pulumi to create a robust, scalable internal developer platform.

By leveraging `KEBAP` and the wider CNCF ecosystem, organizations can accelerate their journey towards effective
platform
engineering. This approach not only enhances operational efficiency but also positions teams to readily adopt and

> benefit from emerging Cloud Native technologies, ensuring their platforms remain future-proof and aligned with industry

Reviewer: i would change this line based on what i said above. Our goal here is not to advocate for the CNCF technologies. I think we are trying to say for people using CNCF stack of things, let me give you a way to string it all together to build a platform...

best practices.

## One Reference Architecture: The `KEBAP` Stack

The `KEBAP` stack consists of the following components:

- **K**ubernetes (with Kyverno as a bonus)
- **E**xternal Secrets Operator
- **B**ackstage
- **A**rgo CD
- **P**ulumi

This combination forms a standardized GitOps stack applicable to various infrastructure projects. By implementing the
`KEBAP` stack, we've consistently reduced the time required for teams to establish development and production
environments from months to minutes.

To following along, we are going to use
the [capabilities of platforms](https://tag-app-delivery.cncf.io/whitepapers/platforms/#capabilities-of-platforms)
definition from the CNCF working group on Platforms.

<img src="base.png">

## Let's Break It Down

Let's take a closer look at each component of the `KEBAP` stack and understand how they work together to streamline the
software delivery process.

The five layers of the `KEBAP` stack are designed to address different aspects of the software delivery process:

### Kubernetes

<img src="k.png">

> [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) serves as the central control plane. It provides a well-defined API for managing

Reviewer: This is the part that doesn't make sense to me. Is K8s actually the control plane. K8s is the place that manages the compute workloads that is for sure. In some ways really K8s is the data plane part of a platform right?

Author: k8s is referred in this context as control plane. Especially when working with controllers that provision stuff like Databases, which run on k8s too.

containerized workloads and with the help of the Kubernetes Operator pattern, it can be extended to manage custom
resources. In our case we extend

> the Kubernetes API with the Pulumi Kubernetes Operator to manage the infrastructure resources in the same way as the

Reviewer: I really don't understand what this sentence means. I think you need to rewrite it.

                    type:
                      description: type is the Pulumi type token for this resource.
                      minLength: 1
                      type: string
                  required:
                  - type
                  type: object
                description: resources declares the Pulumi resources that will be
                  deployed and managed by the program.
                type: object
              variables:
                additionalProperties:
                  x-kubernetes-preserve-unknown-fields: true
                description: |-
                  variables specifies intermediate values of the program; the values of variables are
                  expressions that can be re-used.
                type: object
            type: object
        type: object
    served: true
    storage: true
    subresources: {}
```

### Argo CD

<img src="a.png">

[Argo CD](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) handles the deployment layer, ensuring that the current deployment
matches what is declaratively defined in the
source. It's emerging as the de facto standard due to its rich front-end and powerful features. Argo CD implements the

> GitOps model, continuously monitoring your Git repositories and automatically updating the deployed applications to

Reviewer: I think we need to discuss whether this is deploying data plane stuff or deploying the workloads to run in the K8s cluster or is it deploying the Pulumi infrastructure as code programs? What is actually being deployed?

    clusterName: "do-cluster"
    clusterRegion: "nyc1"
    nodePoolName: "default"
    nodeCount: 1
    version: 1.30.1-do.0

  resources:
    do_cluster:
      type: digitalocean:KubernetesCluster
      properties:
        name: "${clusterName}"
        region: "${clusterRegion}"
        version: "${version}"
        destroyAllAssociatedResources: true
        nodePool:
          name: "${nodePoolName}"
          size: "s-2vcpu-2gb"
          nodeCount: "${nodeCount}"
    # cut for brevity
---
apiVersion: pulumi.com/v1
kind: Stack
metadata:
  name: ${{values.name}}
spec:
  stack: ${{values.stack}}
  envRefs:
    DIGITALOCEAN_TOKEN:
      type: Env
      env:
        name: DIGITALOCEAN_TOKEN
  programRef:
    name: ${{values.name}}
  destroyOnFinalize: false
```

### External Secrets Operator (ESO)

<img src="e.png" >

ESO addresses the challenge of securely managing secrets in Kubernetes. It integrates with various secret stores (such
as AWS Secrets Manager, HashiCorp Vault, Google Secrets Manager, Azure Key Vault) in a consistent way. This allows you
to configure access to the secret store once for all your required secrets, enhancing security and simplifying
management.

> We even take it a step further by using ESO to manage the secrets from Pulumi ESC (External Secret Configurations) with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We even take it a step further by using ESO to manage the secrets from [Pulumi ESC (Environments, Secrets, and  Configurations)](https://www.pulumi.com/product/esc/) with
```

There is a typo, it is Environments, Secrets, and Configuration. Also please always crosslink our products

```yaml
apiVersion: external-secrets.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterSecretStore
metadata:
  name: secret-store
spec:
  provider:
    pulumi:
      organization: <org>
      environment: <env>
      accessToken:
        secretRef:
          name: pulumi-access-token
          key: PULUMI_ACCESS_TOKEN
          namespace: argocd
```

And then we can define the `ExternalSecret` with all the secrets that we want to manage and pass to our Operator as
environment variables `extraEnv`:

```yaml
apiVersion: external-secrets.io/v1beta1
kind: ExternalSecret
metadata:
  name: pulumi-operator-secrets
spec:
  refreshInterval: 20s
  secretStoreRef:
    kind: ClusterSecretStore
    name: secret-store
  data:
  - secretKey: pulumi-access-token
    remoteRef:
      key: "backstage.pulumi-pat"
  - secretKey: do-token
    remoteRef:
      key: "backstage.do"
```

### Backstage

<img src="b.png" >

Backstage is an open platform for building developer portals. It provides a centralized place for managing software
catalogs, documentation, and tooling. This layer helps in organizing microservices and infrastructure, streamlining the
process for developers to create, manage, and explore services.

> We also installed the [Pulumi plugin](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-backstage-plugin) for Backstage, which allows us

Reviewer: Ok, I think I am understanding why some of this is reading funny. I am going to make this comment here, but I think it applies to how you explain Pulumi + GitOps or Pulumi + K8s operator. 

You are describing the technical implementation detail of things. In this case, using the plugin for Backstage. I actually don't care about the implementation. Readers want to hear about the workflow that is happening. For example..."Backstage provides a developer portal UI that sits atop of collections of Pulumi infrastructure as code program templates. Backstage eseentially is where the end user interacts with this platform. They select their template and Backstage through a Plugin calls Pulumi to provision and manage the infrastructure by executing the IaC program" or something like that. 

Describe the workflow of how the pieces work together. Don't describe just the technical implementation details.

    - name: key
      variable:
        value: "{{ request.object.data.\"client-key\" }}"
    - name: vclusterName
      variable:
        value: "{{ replace_all(name, 'vc-', '') }}"
        jmesPath: 'to_string(@)'
    - name: stage
      variable:
        value: "{{ split(vclusterName, '-')[2] }}"
        jmesPath: 'to_string(@)'
    - name: team
      variable:
        value: "{{ split(vclusterName, '-')[3] }}"
        jmesPath: 'to_string(@)'
    generate:
      kind: Secret
      apiVersion: v1
      name: "{{ vclusterName }}"
      namespace: argocd
      synchronize: true
      data:
        kind: Secret
        metadata:
          labels:
            argocd.argoproj.io/secret-type: cluster
            clusterType: "vcluster"
            env: "{{ stage }}"
            team: "{{ team }}"
        stringData:
          name: "{{ vclusterName }}"
          server: "https://{{ vclusterName }}.{{ namespace }}:443"
          config: |
            {
              "tlsClientConfig": {
                "insecure": false,
                "caData": "{{ ca }}",
                "certData": "{{ cert }}",
                "keyData": "{{ key }}"
              }
            }
```

> ## Putting all the Pieces Together

Reviewer: I think something that is missing is a sample "application or workload" an end user would provision. I think that might actually clarify a few things on where the control plane and data plane reside. I am still having trouble understanding what K8s is doing and what Pulumi is doing when we use the word "infrastructure"

Reviewer: I see, you do a sample in the next section. I think my comments all still apply because it would be good to make a distinction

The `KEBAP` stack fulfills the requirements of a robust GitOps implementation:

> 1. Kubernetes provides the 'declarative infrastructure' through its use of YAML to define the cluster configuration.

Reviewer: Like my comment above...what are we referring to when we say infrastructure

2. Applications run as immutable and versioned containers on these declaratively-defined clusters.
3. Argo CD serves as the GitOps 'agent', ensuring deployments match the defined state.

> 4. Pulumi provisions the supporting infrastructure and bootstraps the running application platform.

Reviewer: Like the above 2 comments, which piece of infra is this...

we add it to the Argo CD as spoke cluster. This way, we can roll out applications to the development cluster in the same
way as we would do for production clusters.

See the definition of the `ClusterPolicy` object in the [Kyverno](#bonus-kyverno) section.

##### Ordering a new production Kubernetes cluster

<img src="order_cluster.png" width="500px">

We use Backstage to order a new production Kubernetes cluster. This time, we use the Pulumi code to create the cluster
in the cloud provider of choice. After the creation of the cluster, we add it to the Argo CD as a production cluster.
This way, we can roll out applications to the production cluster in the same way as we would do for development
clusters.

##### Ordering Other Infrastructure

<img src="order_rest.png" width="500px">

We use Backstage to order other infrastructure components, such as databases, message queues, and storage. We use again
the Pulumi Kubernetes Operator to create the infrastructure components in the Kubernetes cluster. This way, we can
manage all the infrastructure components in the same way as we manage the Kubernetes clusters.

## Conclusion and Pulumi Cloud as an Off-the-Shelf Solution

> Many organizations are adopting a CNCF-based stack for their infrastructure needs. These teams require robust platforms

Reviewer: Yeah this is more the messaging I was looking for when I made my comments about your intro

operations. While CNCF projects excel in various areas, there's often a gap in managing the entire infrastructure
lifecycle programmatically.

Pulumi fills this critical role by seamlessly integrating with other CNCF projects in the Cloud Native ecosystem. This
powerful combination creates a `KEBAP` stack, providing:

1. A secure, automated, and auditable environment
2. Reproducible and programmable infrastructure-as-code
3. Unified management of cloud resources, Kubernetes, and application deployments
4. Faster onboarding for new team members
5. Easier compliance with regulatory requirements due to increased auditability

By leveraging Pulumi within a CNCF ecosystem, organizations can significantly reduce costs through automation,
eliminating manual processes that previously required substantial time and effort. This approach empowers teams to
build, test, and operate software more efficiently, accelerating innovation while maintaining robust control over their
infrastructure.

But there is also a downside: The `KEBAP` stack requires a significant investment in time and resources to set up and

> maintain as you are in full charge of the integration of the components. The CNCF landscape is not an integration map,

Reviewer: both integration of the components as well as operating them like services
